RFD 98: Registered OpenSSH Nodes (#19261)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/0098-registered-openssh-nodes.md

```yaml
kind: node
metadata:
  name: 5da56852-2adb-4540-a37c-80790203f6a9
spec:
  addr: 1.2.3.4:22
  hostname: agentless-node
version: v2
```

`tctl` will auto-generate `metadata.name` if it is not already set so users don't have to generate GUIDs themselves if `sub_kind` is `openssh`. Also, if `sub_kind` is set to `openssh`, `spec.public_addr` will not be allowed for registered OpenSSH nodes as it is not needed. An example of a registered OpenSSH node resource:

```yaml
kind: node
sub_kind: openssh
metadata:
  name: 5da56852-2adb-4540-a37c-80790203f6a9
spec:
  addr: 1.2.3.4:22
  hostname: agentless-node
version: v2
```

### OpenSSH CA

For security related reasons that will be discussed below, a new CA will be added called OpenSSH CA. The OpenSSH CA will be responsible for generating and signing user certificates that will be used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes. The public key of the OpenSSH CA will be copied to all registered OpenSSH nodes and configured as `TrustedUserCAKeys` in `sshd_config`.

#### Manual certificate rotation

> Users not using EC2 discovery mode and hosting registered OpenSSH nodes themselves will have to rotate the OpenSSH CA manually. They can do so by:

Reviewer: We could probably export this CA with minimal additional work to Machine ID for automated rotation - and this has the benefit of being able to issue a host certificate as well.

Author: That's a good thought, but I think the Agentless installation/registration code will also be responsible for rotating CAs and host certs. Is that correct @lxea?

Author: I believe eventually yes, I'm a bit fuzzy on the details of what else may be supported though.

Reviewer 2: @strideynet We do have the plan to extend the support. First want to add support for AWS and Azure + GCP. For on-premise installations as we don't have any discovery service that we could use to discover all OpenSSH nodes, we will probably require a user to register them manually using `tctl`.

Reviewer: 👍  nice - just wanted to check if I needed to be in the loop on this but looks like you have it covered.

1. Exporting the OpenSSH CA: `tctl auth export --type=openssh | sed "s/cert-authority\ //"`
2. Writing the exported CA to the configuration folder of the node's SSH daemon, ex. `/etc/ssh/` for OpenSSH on Linux

> 3. Replace the `TrustedUserCAKeys` setting in `sshd_config` to point to the newly created CA

Reviewer 2: This is not the whole process. The installation is missing the server certificate that will be presented to Teleport when connecting to sshd.

Author: Done

### RBAC

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Done

Using the new OpenSSH CA to sign certificates used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes solves this problem, as Teleport users do not have access to any certificates signed by the OpenSSH CA.

### UX

The following Teleport node features won't work with registered OpenSSH nodes:

- Enhanced session recording and restricted networking
- Host user provisioning
- Session recording without SSH session termination
- Dynamic labels
- Outbound persistent tunnels to Proxies

Due to this and other potential future differences, `tsh ls` and the node listing on the web UI should be updated to display if nodes are registered OpenSSH nodes or Teleport agent nodes.

> ### Future work

Reviewer 2: I don't think that anything mentioned below is "Future work".

Author: Done

#### Session recording

> Currently session recording is required to be set be in `proxy` mode to work with OpenSSH nodes. That is not going to change, but ideally this requirement could be lifted when Teleport agent nodes and registered OpenSSH nodes are both in a single cluster. When establishing an SSH connection inside a cluster, depending on what the session recording mode is set to the appropriate type of session recording would be used:

Reviewer 2: I'd rephrase this and explicitly say that:
1. proxy recording won't be removed (when agentelss is implemented)
2. nodes currently working in the proxy recording mode can be migrated to agentless (AWS automatically, on-premise with `tctl`)

Author: Done

---
authors: Andrew LeFevre (andrew.lefevre@goteleport.com)
state: draft
---

# RFD 98 - Registered OpenSSH Nodes

## Required approvers

* Engineering: @jakule && @r0mant
* Product: @klizhentas

> * Security: @reedloden

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Security: @reedloden || @jent
```

Author: Done

## Details

### Registering nodes

A new sub-kind to the `node` resource will be added for registered OpenSSH nodes: `openssh`. The absence of a `node` resource sub-kind (or presence of a `teleport` sub-kind) will imply that a node is a Teleport agent node, making this change backwards compatible.

#### Registering with `tctl`

`tctl` should not require as many fields to be set when creating nodes. This is an example `node` resource that will work with `tctl create --force` today:

```yaml
kind: node
metadata:
  name: 5da56852-2adb-4540-a37c-80790203f6a9
spec:
  addr: 1.2.3.4:22
  hostname: agentless-node
version: v2
```

`tctl` will auto-generate `metadata.name` if it is not already set so users don't have to generate GUIDs themselves if `sub_kind` is `openssh`. Also, if `sub_kind` is set to `openssh`, `spec.public_addr` will not be allowed for registered OpenSSH nodes as it is not needed. An example of a registered OpenSSH node resource:

```yaml
kind: node
sub_kind: openssh
metadata:
  name: 5da56852-2adb-4540-a37c-80790203f6a9
spec:
  addr: 1.2.3.4:22
  hostname: agentless-node
version: v2
```

> When manually registering an OpenSSH node, create a registered OpenSSH node resource file and create the resource in the cluster with `tctl create --force <node.yml>`. Then follow the steps outlined below in `Manual certificate rotation` to configure the registered OpenSSH node.

Reviewer 2: Do we still need `--force` flag to register the node resource?

Author: Currently, do you think that requirement should be lifted?

Reviewer 2: I think it should be lifted. From a UX perspective, I don't see a reason why this would be required. Other Teleport resources don't require it.

Author: Done

### OpenSSH CA

For security related reasons that will be discussed below, a new CA will be added called OpenSSH CA. The OpenSSH CA will be responsible for generating and signing user certificates that will be used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes. The public key of the OpenSSH CA will be copied to all registered OpenSSH nodes and configured as `TrustedUserCAKeys` in `sshd_config`.

#### Manual certificate rotation

Users not using EC2 discovery mode and hosting registered OpenSSH nodes themselves will have to rotate the OpenSSH CA manually and generate new SSH host certificates. They can do so by:

1. Exporting the OpenSSH CA: `tctl auth export --type=openssh | sed "s/cert-authority\ //"`
2. Write the exported CA to the configuration folder of the node's SSH daemon, ex. `/etc/ssh/` for OpenSSH on Linux
3. Replace the `TrustedUserCAKeys` setting in `sshd_config` to point to the newly created CA
4. Generate a new host certificate: `tctl auth sign --host=<addr,hostname> --format=openssh --out=host-cert`
5. Replace the existing host certificate with the new one on the node and set `HostKey` and `HostCertificate` in `sshd_config`

### RBAC

> When a user sends a request to a Proxy to connect to a node, the Proxy will attempt to find a node resource by either its hostname or IP, whichever the user specified. If the resource exists and has the `openssh` `sub_kind`, an RBAC check will be performed. If the resource does not exist or isn't an `openssh` node, the connection flow will continue as normal.

Reviewer 3: Isn't this concern alleviated by using a different CA for OpenSSH vs Teleport nodes? Off the top of my head I'm not sure what extra string check buys us tbh.

> When a user sends a request to a Proxy to connect to a node, the Proxy will attempt to find a node resource by either its hostname or IP, whichever the user specified. If the resource exists and has the `openssh` `sub_kind`, an RBAC check will be performed. If the resource does not exist or isn't an `openssh` node, the connection flow will continue as normal.

Author: @jakule are you saying the server string check will allow us to report a more useful error to the client?

> When a user sends a request to a Proxy to connect to a node, the Proxy will attempt to find a node resource by either its hostname or IP, whichever the user specified. If the resource exists and has the `openssh` `sub_kind`, an RBAC check will be performed. If the resource does not exist or isn't an `openssh` node, the connection flow will continue as normal.

Reviewer 2: I'm more concerned about registering OpenSSH node as Teleport and skipping the RBAC check, but even then, the user will get an authentication error, so from a security perspective, we're "fine". From a usability perspective, we could ping each server and check the client string, but this would make the registration slow and would require all nodes to be available. I think that the current compromise is fine.

### Security

Both RBAC checks and session recording for registered OpenSSH nodes require that users connect through a Proxy. If users are able to connect to registered OpenSSH nodes directly, they can bypass both features. Currently the User CA public key is copied to OpenSSH nodes and configured to be trusted by `sshd`. This means OpenSSH nodes will accept certificates that are signed by the User CA. The problem with that is when Teleport users authenticate with a cluster, the Auth server replies with a certificate that is signed by the User CA. Users could potentially use this certificate to directly connect to registered OpenSSH nodes.

> Using the new OpenSSH CA to sign certificates used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes solves this problem, as Teleport users do not have access to any certificates signed by the OpenSSH CA.

Reviewer 4: What about agent forwarding?  The user may not have access to the certificate but consider the following with agent forwarding:
1. A session with agent forwarding is established using teleport.  This session is recorded
2. While the above session is still active, the attacker then uses the agent forwarding to establish a new connection to the server.  If this new connection is established from another connection path (ie not through Teleport, possibly to the server directly after forwarding the agent again to the attackers local system), this connection will completely escape recording.

I assume agent forwarding is just not compatible with this feature?

Reviewer 2: @capnspacehook The concern here is that if the OpenSSH CA signed cert is forwarded, then anyone with access to the agent forwarded socket will have access to any other `sshd` node that trusts OpenSSH CA. Please add to the RFD:
1. Even with the agent forwarding enabled `ssh -A`, the generated certificate signed with OpenSSH CA won't be forwarded.
2. RBAC `allow agent forwarding` option will be respected, and the Teleport administrator can block session forwarded in the agentless.
3. By default, agent forwarding is disabled, and it's not required to use agentless mode.

@jentfoo Correct me if I'm missing something.

Author: Added to RFD.

---
authors: Andrew LeFevre (andrew.lefevre@goteleport.com)
state: draft
---

# RFD 98 - Registered OpenSSH Nodes

## Required approvers

* Engineering: @jakule && @r0mant
* Product: @klizhentas
* Security: @reedloden || @jentfoo

## What

Allow OpenSSH nodes to be registered in a Teleport cluster.

## Why

[Agentless EC2 discovery mode](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/17865) will discover and configure OpenSSH nodes so they can authenticate with a cluster. But those OpenSSH nodes aren't registered as `node` resources in the backend. We need a way to register agentless OpenSSH nodes as `node` resources so they can be viewed and managed by users. RBAC and session recording should function correctly with registered OpenSSH nodes as well.

## Details

### Registering nodes

A new sub-kind to the `node` resource will be added for registered OpenSSH nodes: `openssh`. The absence of a `node` resource sub-kind (or presence of a `teleport` sub-kind) will imply that a node is a Teleport agent node, making this change backwards compatible.

> #### Registering with `tctl`

Reviewer 3: Are there going to be any changes to our API client to allow managing these resources using API? Might be worth including a separate section about API, even if just to mention it if it will just work with existing API methods.

Author: No changes are needed, added

`tctl` should not require as many fields to be set when creating nodes. This is an example `node` resource that will work with `tctl create --force` today:

```yaml
kind: node
metadata:
  name: 5da56852-2adb-4540-a37c-80790203f6a9
spec:
  addr: 1.2.3.4:22
  hostname: agentless-node
version: v2
```

`tctl` will auto-generate `metadata.name` if it is not already set so users don't have to generate GUIDs themselves if `sub_kind` is `openssh`. Also, if `sub_kind` is set to `openssh`, `spec.public_addr` will not be allowed for registered OpenSSH nodes as it is not needed. An example of a registered OpenSSH node resource:

```yaml
kind: node
sub_kind: openssh
metadata:
  name: 5da56852-2adb-4540-a37c-80790203f6a9
spec:
  addr: 1.2.3.4:22
  hostname: agentless-node
version: v2
```

When manually registering an OpenSSH node, create a registered OpenSSH node resource file and create the resource in the cluster with `tctl create --force <node.yml>`. Then follow the steps outlined below in `Manual certificate rotation` to configure the registered OpenSSH node.

### OpenSSH CA

> For security related reasons that will be discussed below, a new CA will be added called OpenSSH CA. The OpenSSH CA will be responsible for generating and signing user certificates that will be used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes. The public key of the OpenSSH CA will be copied to all registered OpenSSH nodes and configured as `TrustedUserCAKeys` in `sshd_config`.

Reviewer 3: Host credentials will still be signed by Host CA, correct? Let's mention this in this section.

Author: Done

#### Manual certificate rotation

> Users not using EC2 discovery mode and hosting registered OpenSSH nodes themselves will have to rotate the OpenSSH CA manually and generate new SSH host certificates. They can do so by:

Reviewer 3: They will need to do this when Host CA is rotated too, right?

Author: Yes, that is why I mention that SSH host certificates will need to be regenerated.

Reviewer 2: @capnspacehook The RFD still doesn't mention that HostCA needs to be rotated.

Author: Done

### Security

Both RBAC checks and session recording for registered OpenSSH nodes require that users connect through a Proxy. If users are able to connect to registered OpenSSH nodes directly, they can bypass both features. Currently the User CA public key is copied to OpenSSH nodes and configured to be trusted by `sshd`. This means OpenSSH nodes will accept certificates that are signed by the User CA. The problem with that is when Teleport users authenticate with a cluster, the Auth server replies with a certificate that is signed by the User CA. Users could potentially use this certificate to directly connect to registered OpenSSH nodes.

Using the new OpenSSH CA to sign certificates used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes solves this problem, as Teleport users do not have access to any certificates signed by the OpenSSH CA.

#### Forwarding SSH Agents

> If a certificate signed by the OpenSSH CA is added to a forwarded SSH agent, then anyone with access to the forwarded SSH agent socket will have access to any other registered OpenSSH node that trusts OpenSSH CA. To prevent this, certificates signed by the OpenSSH CA will never be added to SSH agents. Futhermore, forwarding SSH agents from users' machines will not be required to access registered OpenSSH nodes and will only happen when a user explicitly requests it (ie `tsh ssh -A`) and it is allowed. The `forward_agent` role option will continue to be respected, allowing administrators to control if Teleport users can forward SSH agents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a certificate signed by the OpenSSH CA is added to a forwarded SSH agent, then anyone with access to the forwarded SSH agent socket will have access to any other registered OpenSSH node that trusts OpenSSH CA. To prevent this, certificates signed by the OpenSSH CA will never be added to SSH agents. Furthermore, forwarding SSH agents from users' machines will not be required to access registered OpenSSH nodes and will only happen when a user explicitly requests it (ie `tsh ssh -A`) and it is allowed. The `forward_agent` role option will continue to be respected, allowing administrators to control if Teleport users can forward SSH agents.
```

Author: Done

### Security

Both RBAC checks and session recording for registered OpenSSH nodes require that users connect through a Proxy. If users are able to connect to registered OpenSSH nodes directly, they can bypass both features. Currently the User CA public key is copied to OpenSSH nodes and configured to be trusted by `sshd`. This means OpenSSH nodes will accept certificates that are signed by the User CA. The problem with that is when Teleport users authenticate with a cluster, the Auth server replies with a certificate that is signed by the User CA. Users could potentially use this certificate to directly connect to registered OpenSSH nodes.

Using the new OpenSSH CA to sign certificates used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes solves this problem, as Teleport users do not have access to any certificates signed by the OpenSSH CA.

#### Forwarding SSH Agents

> If a certificate signed by the OpenSSH CA is added to a forwarded SSH agent, then anyone with access to the forwarded SSH agent socket will have access to any other registered OpenSSH node that trusts OpenSSH CA. To prevent this, certificates signed by the OpenSSH CA will never be added to SSH agents. Futhermore, forwarding SSH agents will not be required to access registered OpenSSH nodes and will only happen when a user explicitly requests it (ie `tsh ssh -A`). The `forward_agent` role option will continue to be respected, allowing administrators to control if Teleport users can forward SSH agents.

Reviewer 4: @capnspacehook Can you help clarify this:

> will only happen when a user explicitly requests it (ie `tsh ssh -A`)

What agent is forwarded in the `-A` case?  Forwarding the agent from the users computer is acceptable (since that would require them to go back to the proxy before connecting out).  But allowing `-A` to forward from the proxy certificate for the user would be concerning even if explicitly requested.

I assume that's not the case since you state `certificates signed by the OpenSSH CA will never be added to SSH agents`, but I would appreciate just clarifying that `-A` forwards only the source client agent like it does today.

Author: Only the user's agent will ever be forwarded, updated RFD to reflect this.

---
authors: Andrew LeFevre (andrew.lefevre@goteleport.com)
state: draft
---

# RFD 98 - Registered OpenSSH Nodes

## Required approvers

* Engineering: @jakule && @r0mant
* Product: @klizhentas
* Security: @reedloden

## What

Allow OpenSSH nodes to be registered in a Teleport cluster.

## Why

[Agentless EC2 discovery mode](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/17865) will discover and configure OpenSSH nodes so they can authenticate with a cluster. But those OpenSSH nodes aren't registered as `node` resources in the backend. We need a way to register agentless OpenSSH nodes as `node` resources so they can be viewed and managed by users. RBAC and session recording should function correctly with registered OpenSSH nodes as well.

## Details

### Registering nodes

> A new sub-kind to the `node` resource will be added for registered OpenSSH nodes: `agentless`. The absence of a `node` resource sub-kind will imply that a node is a Teleport agent node, making this change backwards compatible.

Reviewer 3: Yeah that's fair. Main reason I asked is we just have to be careful now when dealing with code that expects only, say, Teleport nodes and filter out OpenSSH subkind nodes, and vice versa which kinda increases "cognitive" load.

#### Registering with `tctl`

`tctl` should not require as many fields to be set when creating nodes. This is an example `node` resource that will work with `tctl create --force` today:

```yaml
kind: node
metadata:
  name: 5da56852-2adb-4540-a37c-80790203f6a9
spec:
  addr: 1.2.3.4:22
  hostname: agentless-node
version: v2
```

> `tctl` will auto-generate `metadata.name` if it is not already set so users don't have to generate GUIDs themselves if `sub_kind` is `agentless`. Also, if `sub_kind` is set to `agentless`, `spec.public_addr` will not be allowed for registered OpenSSH nodes as it is not needed.

Author: Done

### Agentless CA

> For security related reasons that will be discussed below, a new CA will be added called Agentless CA. The Agentless CA will be responsible for generating and signing user certificates that will be used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes. The public key of the Agentless CA will be copied to all registered OpenSSH nodes and configured as `TrustedUserCAKeys` in `sshd_config`.

Author: If the new CA is called `OpenSSH CA`, that would be confusing as it won't be used for unregistered OpenSSH nodes.

> For security related reasons that will be discussed below, a new CA will be added called Agentless CA. The Agentless CA will be responsible for generating and signing user certificates that will be used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes. The public key of the Agentless CA will be copied to all registered OpenSSH nodes and configured as `TrustedUserCAKeys` in `sshd_config`.

Reviewer 3: TBH I think that going forward this should be the only supported (or at least default) method of connecting to OpenSSH nodes so it probably wouldn't be a concern. I'm just thinking that "agentless" is even more confusing for users who don't know anything about our terminology. Because this will appear in `tctl status`, come up during CA rotation, etc. and if they see "OpenSSH CA" that's quite clear what it's for, and if they see "Agentless CA" that's kinda confusing.

> For security related reasons that will be discussed below, a new CA will be added called Agentless CA. The Agentless CA will be responsible for generating and signing user certificates that will be used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes. The public key of the Agentless CA will be copied to all registered OpenSSH nodes and configured as `TrustedUserCAKeys` in `sshd_config`.

Reviewer 2: Should we then somehow indicate that in proxy recording mode, UserCA/HostCA should be rotated? I'm concerned about people rotating the wrong CA thinking that OpenSSH CA is responsible for all OpenSSH installation, including the proxy recording mode.

### RBAC

When OpenSSH nodes are registered currently, RBAC checks for those nodes are not performed. RBAC logic will have to be updated so RBAC checks for registered OpenSSH nodes are performed. There are multiple ways to implement this, each with their own advantages and disadvantages.

#### Option 1

> Each registered OpenSSH node will have a unique Agentless CA. The CA public key will include information about the node that it was created for, including the node's UUID and the node's labels. When `(lib/srv.AuthHandlers).UserKeyAuth` is called to authenticate a node's user certificate, it will check if node information is present in the CA public key. If node information is present, an RBAC check will be performed using the label information in the CA public key.

Reviewer 3: This will make CA rotation a giant pain. I would rule out this option tbh.

Pros:

- No need to lookup node resources to perform RBAC checks

Cons:

- Requires connecting to node to perform RBAC check
- Updating node labels requires generating and distributing a new host key
- CA rotation is more complex as every registered OpenSSH node requires a unique CA

#### Option 2

> When a user sends a request to a Proxy to connect to a node, the Proxy will attempt to find a node resource by either its hostname or IP, whichever the user specified. If the resource exists and has the `agentless` `sub_kind`, an RBAC check will be performed. If the resource does not exist or isn't an `agentless` node, the connection flow will continue as normal.

Reviewer 3: > find a node resource by either its hostname or IP

How will the hostname search work? Shouldn't we resolve the hostname to the IP first and then just look up by address?

Author: Resolving nodes will likely use [`lib/proxy.getServer`](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/lib/proxy/router.go#L284), which already handles find a node by its UUID, hostname, or IP and returning an error if multiple nodes are found from the given search criteria.

Pros:

- No need to connect to node to perform RBAC check
- Updating node labels can simply be done by using `tctl`

> - CA rotation is simple as every registered OpenSSH node will have the same CA

Reviewer 3: Can you add an explicit section covering CA rotation please.

Reviewer 2: @r0mant Shouldn't that be covered by https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/18676 ?

Author: Done

Cons: none (that I can think of)

#### My choice: Option 2

Option 2 makes CA rotation and updating node labels much easier, and has the only downside of having to search for node resources before connecting to one. 

### Security

> Both RBAC checks and session recording for registered OpenSSH nodes require that users connect through a Proxy. If users are able to connect to registered OpenSSH nodes directly, they can bypass both features. Currently the User CA public key is copied to OpenSSH nodes and configured to be trusted by `sshd`. This means OpenSSH nodes will accept certificates that are signed by the User CA. The problem with that is when Teleport users authenticate with a cluster, the Auth server replies with a certificate that is signed by the User CA. Users could potentially use this certificate to directly connect to registered OpenSSH nodes.

Reviewer 3: Can you add a section explaining "migration" process i.e. how would users who already have a fleet of OpenSSH servers migrate them to this "agentless" mode.

Author: That's a good idea, haven't thought of that. One thing to note is currently Agentless discovery and registration is limited to AWS, so this will only work for users with OpenSSH servers there. I imagine we may want to expand Agentless discovery and registration to work on other cloud platforms, but I guess the underlying cloud platform shouldn't affect how agentless nodes are registered and used.

Reviewer 2: @r0mant Do we want to eventually migrate "proxy recording" users to use agentless mode? I thought that they were different features, and we do expect people to move. 
If we want to give such an option, can we work on that in a different RFD? I think that the scope of that task is huge (updating the current OpenSSH installation, creating RBAC rules, potentially managing AWS and non-AWS nodes that should still work in the "old" mode, etc).

Reviewer 2: @capnspacehook Can you describe the migration process? A user must register all nodes in Teleport and replace the trusted CA.

Author: Done

Using the new Agentless CA to sign certificates used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes solves this problem, as Teleport users do not have access to any certificates signed by the Agentless CA.

### UX

The following Teleport node features won't work with registered OpenSSH nodes:

- Enhanced session recording and restricted networking
- Host user provisioning
- Session recording without SSH session termination
- Dynamic labels

> - Outbound persistent tunnels to Proxies

Reviewer 3: Just a note for future: this is a good list of things to remember to add to the docs explaining differences in running Teleport agents vs agentless.

### RBAC

When OpenSSH nodes are registered currently, RBAC checks for those nodes are not preformed. RBAC logic will have to be updated so RBAC checks for registered OpenSSH nodes are preformed. There are multiple ways to implement this, each with their own advantages and disadvantages.

#### Option 1

Each registered OpenSSH node will have a unique Agentless CA. The CA public key will include information about the node that it was created for, including the unique node name and the node's labels. When `(lib/srv.AuthHandlers).UserKeyAuth` is called to authenticate a node's user certificate, it will check if node information is present in the CA public key. If node information is present, an RBAC check will be preformed using the label information in the CA public key.

Pros:

- No need to lookup node resources to preform RBAC checks

Cons:

- Requires connecting to node to preform RBAC check
- Updating node labels requires generating and distributing a new host key
- CA rotation is more complex as every registered OpenSSH node requires a unique CA

> #### Option 2

Author: Good to know, thanks!

> When a user sends a request to a Proxy to connect to a node, the Proxy will attempt to find a node resource by either its hostname or address, whichever the user specified. If the resource exists and has the `agentless` `sub_kind`, an RBAC check will be preformed. If the resource does not exist or isn't an `agentless` node, the connection flow will continue as normal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a user sends a request to a Proxy to connect to a node, the Proxy will attempt to find a node resource by either its hostname or IP address, whichever the user specified. If the resource exists and has the `agentless` `sub_kind`, an RBAC check will be performed. If the resource does not exist or isn't an `agentless` node, the connection flow will continue as normal.
```

Author: Done

Pros:

> - No need to connect to node to preform RBAC check

Reviewer 2: I don't see how this is relevant. Yes, we don't need to connect to the node to perform RBAC, but eventually, we need to connect to that node anyways. I just don't sound like pros or cons.

Author: My original thought was preforming security checks *before* establishing a connection to a node would be safer than preforming security checks *after* establishing a connection to a node. Thinking about it more makes me realize there isn't a huge difference given a realistic threat model, but checking if a connection should be allowed before establishing it should reduce attack surface I'd think.

I think it's a general security principle to delay a sensitive operation as long as possible in code to minimize the impact of a logic bug or vulnerability, though that may not apply here.

> - Updating node labels can simply be done in DB

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Updating node labels can simply be done by using `tctl`
```

Author: Done

- CA rotation is simple as every registered OpenSSH node will have the same CA

Cons:

> - Node resources must be looked up before every node connection

Reviewer 2: Node resources must be looked up before every connection, even connecting to the Teleport nodes. We could potentially work around that, TBH, but I'm not exactly sure how we suppose to do that.

Author: Gotcha, I'll remove this con then

### Security

Both RBAC checks and session recording for registered OpenSSH nodes require that users connect through a Proxy. If users are able to connect to registered OpenSSH nodes directly, they can bypass both features. Currently the User CA public key is copied to OpenSSH nodes and configured to be trusted by `sshd`. This means OpenSSH nodes will accept certificates that are signed by the User CA. The problem with that is when Teleport users authenticate with a cluster, the Auth server replies with a certificate that is signed by the User CA. Users could potentially use this certificate to directly connect to registered OpenSSH nodes.

Using the new Agentless CA to sign certificates used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes solves this problem, as Teleport users do not have access to any certificates signed by the Agentless CA.

### UX

The following Teleport node features won't work with registered OpenSSH nodes:

- Enhanced session recording and restricted networking
- Host user provisioning
- Session recording without SSH session termination
- Dynamic labels
- Outbound persistent tunnels to Proxies

> Due to this and other potential future differences, `tsh ls` and the node listing on the web UI should be updated to display if nodes are registered OpenSSH nodes, or simply 'agentless'.

Reviewer 2: Teleport currently doesn't support registering OpenSSH nodes. The only way to use OpenSSH nodes is to use proxy recording mode. I think that the only distinction that we can make is to show whether the node is a Teleport node or an agentless node.

Author: Oops, that's a typo, thanks

Using the new OpenSSH CA to sign certificates used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes solves this problem, as Teleport users do not have access to any certificates signed by the OpenSSH CA.

#### Forwarding SSH Agents

If a certificate signed by the OpenSSH CA is added to a forwarded SSH agent, then anyone with access to the forwarded SSH agent socket will have access to any other registered OpenSSH node that trusts OpenSSH CA. To prevent this, certificates signed by the OpenSSH CA will never be added to SSH agents. Furthermore, forwarding SSH agents from users' machines will not be required to access registered OpenSSH nodes and will only happen when a user explicitly requests it (ie `tsh ssh -A`) and it is allowed. The `forward_agent` role option will continue to be respected, allowing administrators to control if Teleport users can forward SSH agents.

### UX

The following Teleport node features won't work with registered OpenSSH nodes:

- Enhanced session recording and restricted networking

> - Host user provisioning

Reviewer 2: nit: You can still use PAM user provisioning:
```suggestion
- Host user provisioning (without using PAM)
```

---
authors: Andrew LeFevre (andrew.lefevre@goteleport.com)
state: draft
---

# RFD 98 - Registered OpenSSH Nodes

## Required approvers

* Engineering: @jakule && @r0mant
* Product: @klizhentas
* Security: @reedloden

## What

Allow OpenSSH nodes to be registered in a Teleport cluster.

## Why

[Agentless EC2 discovery mode](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/17865) will discover and configure OpenSSH nodes so they can authenticate with a cluster. But those OpenSSH nodes aren't registered as `node` resources in the backend. We need a way to register agentless OpenSSH nodes as `node` resources so they can be viewed and managed by users. RBAC and session recording should function correctly with registered OpenSSH nodes as well.

## Details

### Registering nodes

> A new sub-kind to the `node` resource will be added for registered OpenSSH nodes: `agentless`. The absence of a `node` resource sub-kind will imply that a node is a Teleport agent node, making this change backwards compatible.

Author: Done

#### Registering with `tctl`

`tctl` should not require as many fields to be set when creating nodes. This is an example `node` resource that will work with `tctl create --force` today:

```yaml
kind: node
metadata:
  name: 5da56852-2adb-4540-a37c-80790203f6a9
spec:
  addr: 1.2.3.4:22
  hostname: agentless-node
version: v2
```

> `tctl` will auto-generate `metadata.name` if it is not already set so users don't have to generate GUIDs themselves if `sub_kind` is `agentless`. Also, if `sub_kind` is set to `agentless`, `spec.public_addr` will not be allowed for registered OpenSSH nodes as it is not needed. An example of a registered OpenSSH node resource:

Author: Done

```yaml
kind: node

> sub_kind: agentless

Reviewer 5: sub_kind: `openssh` would make it more clear to users that it's OpenSSH node?

Reviewer 5: sub_kind: `teleport` can make it clear that it's `teleport` node, we can make it a default for backwards-compatibility

Author: Done

metadata:
  name: 5da56852-2adb-4540-a37c-80790203f6a9
spec:
  addr: 1.2.3.4:22
  hostname: agentless-node
version: v2
```

> ### Agentless CA

Author: Done

> For security related reasons that will be discussed below, a new CA will be added called Agentless CA. The Agentless CA will be responsible for generating and signing user certificates that will be used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes. The public key of the Agentless CA will be copied to all registered OpenSSH nodes and configured as `TrustedUserCAKeys` in `sshd_config`.

Author: Done

Pros:

- No need to lookup node resources to perform RBAC checks

Cons:

- Requires connecting to node to perform RBAC check
- Updating node labels requires generating and distributing a new host key
- CA rotation is more complex as every registered OpenSSH node requires a unique CA

#### Option 2

When a user sends a request to a Proxy to connect to a node, the Proxy will attempt to find a node resource by either its hostname or IP, whichever the user specified. If the resource exists and has the `agentless` `sub_kind`, an RBAC check will be performed. If the resource does not exist or isn't an `agentless` node, the connection flow will continue as normal.

Pros:

- No need to connect to node to perform RBAC check
- Updating node labels can simply be done by using `tctl`
- CA rotation is simple as every registered OpenSSH node will have the same CA

Cons: none (that I can think of)

#### My choice: Option 2

> Option 2 makes CA rotation and updating node labels much easier, and has the only downside of having to search for node resources before connecting to one. 

Reviewer 6: Agreed, Option 2 seems much more practical in the long run.
Under the assumption, that a separate Agentless CA is used (as discussed in the Security section)

- Enhanced session recording and restricted networking
- Host user provisioning
- Session recording without SSH session termination
- Dynamic labels
- Outbound persistent tunnels to Proxies

Due to this and other potential future differences, `tsh ls` and the node listing on the web UI should be updated to display if nodes are registered OpenSSH nodes or Teleport agent nodes.

### Future work

#### Session recording

Currently session recording is required to be set be in `proxy` mode to work with OpenSSH nodes. That is not going to change, but ideally this requirement could be lifted when Teleport agent nodes and registered OpenSSH nodes are both in a single cluster. When establishing an SSH connection inside a cluster, depending on what the session recording mode is set to the appropriate type of session recording would be used:

If session recording is in `node` or `node-sync` mode:

- If the node is a Teleport Agent node, the node would record the session and upload it as normal.
- If the node is a registered OpenSSH node, the Proxy would terminate and record the SSH session and upload it.

If session recording is in `proxy` or `proxy-sync` mode:

> - Behavior would be unaffected. The Proxy would terminate, record and upload the session. This mode will still be required if users of a cluster wish to connect to unregistered OpenSSH nodes.

Reviewer 6: What does it exactly mean, that the Proxy would "terminate and record the SSH session"?

Author: Just how Proxy recording mode works currently: https://goteleport.com/docs/architecture/session-recording/#record-at-proxy

---
authors: Andrew LeFevre (andrew.lefevre@goteleport.com)
state: draft
---

# RFD 98 - Registered OpenSSH Nodes

## Required approvers

* Engineering: @jakule && @r0mant
* Product: @klizhentas
* Security: @reedloden

## What

Allow OpenSSH nodes to be registered in a Teleport cluster.

## Why

[Agentless EC2 discovery mode](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/17865) will discover and configure OpenSSH nodes so they can authenticate with a cluster. But those OpenSSH nodes aren't registered as `node` resources in the backend. We need a way to register agentless OpenSSH nodes as `node` resources so they can be viewed and managed by users. RBAC and session recording should function correctly with registered OpenSSH nodes as well.

## Details

> ### OpenSSH CA

Author: Renamed to Agentless CA, suggestions for better names welcome.

> For security related reasons that will be discussed below, a new CA will be added called OpenSSH CA. The OpenSSH CA will be responsible for generating and signing user certificates that will be used to authenticate with registered OpenSSH nodes. The OpenSSH CA will not be used to generate certificates for existing or future *unregistered* OpenSSH nodes, preserving backwards compatibility for existing OpenSSH nodes.

Reviewer 2: > The OpenSSH CA will not be used to generate certificates for existing or future *unregistered* OpenSSH nodes, preserving backwards compatibility for existing OpenSSH nodes.

I don't think I fully understand. The new CA will be used for agentless mode, but how is that related to "unregistered" nodes? AFAIU unregistered nodes are not related to the agentless mode, and the new CA won't (at least at this time) be used anywhere else.

Author: That's the point I was trying to get across, it won't affect unregistered nodes at all. Maybe I should just remove this line and let the reader assume that? I'm unsure, as I thought being explicit here was more helpful

### RBAC

> When OpenSSH nodes are registered currently, RBAC checks for those nodes are not preformed. Even setting `auth_service.session_recording` to `proxy` in an Auth Server's config file does not help. RBAC logic will have to be updated so RBAC checks for registered OpenSSH nodes are preformed.

Reviewer 2: > Even setting `auth_service.session_recording` to `proxy` in an Auth Server's config file does not help.

This sentence sounds like we have a bug, but this is expected behavior. I'd just remove it.

Author: Done

When `(lib/srv.AuthHandlers).UserKeyAuth` is called to authenticate a node's user certificate, it will check what CA signed the certificate. If the OpenSSH CA signed the certificate, the node will be recognized as a registered OpenSSH node. `UserKeyAuth` will lookup the node's details and preform an RBAC check.

### Registering nodes

> A new sub-kind to the `node` resource will be added for registered OpenSSH nodes: `openssh`. The absence of a `node` resource sub-kind will imply that a node is a Teleport agent node, making this change backwards compatible.

Reviewer 2: Do we still need the new subkind?

Author: Yes for Option 2, I guess we could get away with not needing it for Option 1 but it definitely would make debugging easier.

#### Registering with `tctl`

> OpenSSH nodes can already be manually registered using `tctl create --force /path/to/node.yml`, though some changes should be made to make the process more straightforward for users. Agentless EC2 discovery mode will registered discovered OpenSSH nodes without needing user intervention, but if automatically registering an OpenSSH node fails a user may want to register a node manually. Currently nodes cannot be created with `tctl`, only upserted. This limitation should be removed so users can create nodes without having to pass `--force` to `tctl create`.

Reviewer 2: > Currently nodes cannot be created with `tctl`, only upserted. This limitation should be removed so users can create nodes without having to pass `--force` to `tctl create`.

Why do we need to remove this limitation?

Author: I thought making it easier for users to manually create registered OpenSSH nodes could be useful for debugging or fixing things when automatic registration doesn't work

Furthermore, `tctl` should not require as many fields to be set when creating nodes. This is an example `node` resource that will work with `tctl create` today:

```yaml
kind: node
metadata:
  name: 5da56852-2adb-4540-a37c-80790203f6a9
spec:
  addr: 1.2.3.4:22
  hostname: agentless-node
version: v2
```

> `tctl create` will auto-generate `metadata.name` if it is not already set so users don't have to generate GUIDs themselves. Also, if `sub_kind` is set to `openssh`, `spec.public_addr` will not be allowed for registered OpenSSH nodes as it is not needed.

Reviewer 2: nit:

> `tctl create` will auto-generate `metadata.name` if it is not already set so users don't have to generate GUIDs themselves.

I think this is not anything new. I'd just remove it TBH

Author: Currently if `metadata.name` is ommitted `tctl` will error with `missing parameter Name`

### Session recording

Currently session recording is required to be set be in `proxy` mode to work with OpenSSH nodes. That is not going to change, but ideally this requirement could be lifted when Teleport agent nodes and registered OpenSSH nodes are both in a single cluster. When establishing an SSH connection inside a cluster, depending on what the session recording mode is set to the appropriate type of session recording would be used:

If session recording is in `node` or `node-sync` mode:

- If the node is a Teleport Agent node, the node would record the session and upload it as normal.
- If the node is a registered OpenSSH node, the Proxy would terminate and record the SSH session and upload it.

If session recording is in `proxy` or `proxy-sync` mode:

- Behavior would be unaffected. The Proxy would terminate, record and upload the session. This mode will still be required if users of a cluster wish to connect to unregistered OpenSSH nodes.

> I propose that `proxy` or `proxy-sync` session recording modes continue to be required when connecting to any OpenSSH node through Teleport, *at first*. When registering OpenSSH nodes and preforming RBAC checks on them is completed and possibly released, then work could be done to streamline session recording with registered OpenSSH nodes.

Reviewer 2: Can you move this section at the end and mark it as "possible extensions". Currently looks like something that we're going to implement as a part of this RFD which is not true.

Author: Done

---
authors: Andrew LeFevre (andrew.lefevre@goteleport.com)
state: draft
---

# RFD 98 - Registered OpenSSH Nodes

## Required approvers

* Engineering: @jakule && @r0mant
* Product: @klizhentas
* Security: @reedloden

## What

Allow OpenSSH nodes to be registered in a Teleport cluster.

## Why

[Agentless EC2 discovery mode](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/17865) will discover and configure OpenSSH nodes so they can authenticate with a cluster. But those OpenSSH nodes aren't registered as `node` resources in the backend. We need a way to register agentless OpenSSH nodes as `node` resources so they can be viewed and managed by users.

## Details

### Registering nodes

> OpenSSH nodes can already be registered using `tctl create -f /path/to/node.yml`, though some changes should be made to make the process more straightforward for users. Currently nodes cannot be created with `tctl`, only upserted. This limitation should be removed so users can create nodes without having to pass `-f` to `tctl create`.

Author: Thanks, done

> Furthermore, `tctl` should not require as many fields to be set when creating nodes. This is an example `node` resource that will work with `tctl create` today:

Reviewer 7: You've outlined the problem here, but I don't see a solution.

Are you going to stick with `tctl create` and relax the required fields, or add a new command to register nodes that doesn't require dealing with YAML?

Author: Thanks, didn't realize I neglected to specify a solution.

```yaml
kind: node
metadata:
  name: 5da56852-2adb-4540-a37c-80790203f6a9
spec:
  addr: 1.2.3.4:22
  hostname: agentless-node
version: v2
```

> `metadata.name` should be auto-generated if it is not already set so user's don't have to generate GUIDs themselves.

Author: Done

### RBAC

> When OpenSSH nodes are registered RBAC does not work as expected. Even when `auth_service.session_recording` is set to `proxy` in an Auth Server's config file, checking RBAC rules is not done correctly. RBAC logic will have to be updated to correctly handle OpenSSH nodes. Currently RBAC checks are done on Teleport agent nodes, unless the Proxy is in `proxy` session recording mode, then the Proxy handles all RBAC checks. To avoid overloading the Proxy when many nodes are registered, Teleport agent nodes should continue to handle RBAC checks whenever possible. The Proxy will still have to handle RBAC checks for registered OpenSSH nodes, so the question is how will registered OpenSSH nodes be identified vs. Teleport agent nodes?

Reviewer 7: This whole paragraph is a bit confusing to me.

If RBAC does not work as expected, can you detail the expected behavior and the actual behavior?

Author: Attempted to clarify this section, let me know if something is still unclear.

#### Detecting OpenSSH nodes

##### Option 1 - add information to SSH host certs

> When SSH host certificates are created for OpenSSH nodes, we set add an extension `x-teleport-role` that specifies what Teleport component the certificate is for. We could add another role type for OpenSSH nodes, so that when a Proxy connects to an OpenSSH node and reviews it's certificate, it could see from the `x-teleport-role` extension that the node is a registered OpenSSH node and preform the RBAC check appropriately.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
When SSH host certificates are created for OpenSSH nodes, we set add an extension `x-teleport-role` that specifies what Teleport component the certificate is for. We could add another role type for OpenSSH nodes, so that when a Proxy connects to an OpenSSH node and reviews its certificate, it could see from the `x-teleport-role` extension that the node is a registered OpenSSH node and preform the RBAC check appropriately.
```

What would the value of `x-teleport-role` be in this example?

Author: Probably something like `openssh-node` or `registered-openssh-node`, but N/A due to my other comment regarding this option.

Cons:

- Old Teleport components may reject certificates with an unknown value for the `x-teleport-role` extension. `(api/types.SystemRoles).Check` will return with an error if it does not recognize the `api/type.SystemRole` constant.

##### Option 2 - add a `node` resource sub-kind

A new sub-kind to the `node` resource would be introduced. The name isn't important, but for now let's call this sub-kind `openssh`. When OpenSSH nodes are registered, this `openssh` sub-kind would have to be present in the resource. Then when a Proxy connects to a registered OpenSSH node it could lookup the sub-kind of the node, preforming the RBAC check appropriately. The absence of a `node` resource sub-kind would imply that the node is a Teleport agent node, making this change backwards compatible.

Pros:

- Node certificate generation doesn't need to be changed at all, so this change won't affect any files on remote nodes.

Cons:

- `lib/srv.Authhandlers` might need to be given access to the backend database in order to lookup the sub-kind of `node` resources so it can decide if the RBAC check can be done on the node or not.

##### Option choice: 1

> I believe Option 1 is the better option, as it should be easier to implement and won't involve certificate validation code needing to access the backend database. Option 2 is certainly viable though, I honestly had a hard time deciding which option was the better one.

Reviewer 7: Hm, option 2 seems like it fits better in our existing architecture, but maybe that's because I don't fully understand option 1.

Author: I didn't fully understand our SSH certificate authentication flow, after talking with @jakule we came to the conclusion that Option 1 is not viable. I originally assumed that when connecting to and authenticating with an OpenSSH node, the Host certificate was the only certificate that would be used for authentication so some info could be added to it. But both Host and User certificates are used for authentication, and node-specific info shouldn't be added to a user's certificate.
